now the universe began with a big bang
and for some time there was nothing but
very hot matter flying in all directions
at the speed of light
very shortly though the first star
appeared its name was methuselah
and for a long time it confused
astronomers who believed it might be
older than the universe itself soon
after on a cosmic scale of course
the first black hole started forming
scientists believe
they're what's left of exploded stars
but that's not for sure even today
at the same time cosmic dust and matter
began ionizing
helping to form new stars in the end it
led to thousands and then millions of
stars appearing in space
the universe left cold after the initial
enormous explosion
started heating up again in about a
hundred million years
stars began forming clusters which we
know as galaxies
the earliest of them didn't include any
planets though it was still too soon for
matter to shape into something so big
and solid
so galaxies mainly consisted of stars
and interstellar gas
the oldest ones are believed to have
been born in a relatively small patch of
sky
called hubble ultra deep field named so
after the hubble space telescope
it includes over ten thousand galaxies
after some time
the first known exoplanet was born it
was also dubbed methuselah for its
incredibly old age
it's moving in the orbit of two stars at
once located twelve and a half
thousand light years away from earth
which then didn't even exist
and of course i wasn't around either
soon after though the milky way finally
began taking shape
our home galaxy is a barred spiral which
means it has a bar at the center and
several arms
and on top of one of those our solar
system would eventually be born
right now it's no more than a roughly
circular blob though
the milky way started forming only about
200 million years after the big bang
like many other galaxies but only now
it's becoming closer to what we know and
love
at the same time millions of other
galaxies burst into existence
with stars and planets clustering
together
about eleven and a half billion years
ago a peculiar planet popped up
captain b is the oldest known exoplanet
uncannily similar to earth and
everything nobody knows if it's
inhabited but it sure can be it had more
than enough time to develop live
although spiral is the most common type
of galaxy out there
we know the name of probably the oldest
one it's
bx 442 whose light reaches us across
10.7 billion years at about the same
time
the rate at which stars were appearing
across the universe reached its peak
every second thousands upon thousands of
new stars would burst into existence
immediately starting to gravitate toward
each other forming clusters
and then later becoming galaxies at this
point
the temperature of the universe slowly
began to fall
until now it was hotter than the sun's
surface and quite dense
like me but starting 11 billion years
ago
it all changed powerful galactic cores
and newborn stars stopped sending out so
much energy into space
and the first metal-rich stars began
appearing
metals made them cool down at a higher
rate so the universe stepped on its
track to becoming habitable
with less than 10 billion years before
humans appeared
the first group of galaxies emerged
jkcs041
it's the farthest known galactic cluster
born just 200 million years before the
universe reached a third of its current
size
a mere moment on a cosmic scale and at
roughly the same time
bernard's star appears in the milky way
it's one of the most ancient stars in
our galaxy
and also our close neighbor being just
six light years away from the sun
as the universe continues to expand the
milky way goes on growing and
taking the familiar shape until about
8.8 billion years ago
it had only its thick disk a structure
around the center
where older gas-rich stars mostly dwell
now the thin disk starts forming it's a
thinner layer within the thick disc
in which younger stars more abundant in
metals appear
stars still get born at an astonishing
rate in our galaxy
as well as in many others across the
ever growing universe
that is until about 8 billion years ago
when this growth rate
finally began to subside this occurred
with lots of other galaxies too of
course
mostly because there was not enough
matter to form new stars
in such a cluttered space then roughly
seven and a half billion years ago
something happened a long way from our
galaxy and a gamma ray burst began
traveling across the universe
reaching earth only in 2008
such bursts usually occur because of a
star exploding into a supernova
and they're really spectacular to be
whole but this one was special
it was the furthest and brightest one
ever observed in history
if it were as close to us as the sun it
would be
21 quadrillion times brighter than our
star
that's 15 zeros just so you know
although events such as this happened in
the far corners of the universe
it continued to cool down at an ever
increasing pace
about 7.2 billion years ago the average
temperature of space was only 5 degrees
kelvin
or minus 450 degrees fahrenheit
still it was only a few degrees warmer
than it is today
at -454 degrees in the end the universe
will eventually
reach the absolute zero the temperature
at which atoms don't move at all
and space will be dark and absolutely
still
anyway it's still way long before this
event
and we're now at six and a half billion
years ago the time when the milky way
started taking its recognizable spiral
shape
at long last now it won't be long until
our solar system forms
but there are still things to come
before that
many of the older galaxies have already
taken their current shapes
and stars kept forming and exploding
leaving behind quasars and black holes
which in their turn gave birth to other
galaxies
six billion years ago and dark energy
the most mysterious force in the
universe to this day
somehow accelerates the speed at which
the universe expands
no one is still sure how it does it but
the facts are these for the moment
gravity isn't the only force that keeps
objects apart in space
still nobody knows much about this
strange energy
so nothing is certain five and a half
billion years
ago the solar nebula began collapsing
it's important for us because this
nebula is what would eventually become
the solar system
right now it's no more than a ginormous
cloud of interstellar gas and dust
and it would take another billion years
for it to clump together
and form our star and the planets
orbiting it
in the meantime the milky way has
finally become a complete
barred spiral as we know it today new
stars forming supernova
exploding all of this had never stopped
happening in space
and yet there was one event roughly 4.6
billion years ago
that mattered the most to us the
formation of the sun
the cloud of dust and gas i mentioned
earlier had finally collapsed enough to
form a star
and it took just another couple of
million years for the earth to be born
it was extremely hot back then and there
was no chance for
any life to survive but after a few
hundred million years
the miracle happened and the first
living creatures appeared on the
planet's surface
since then a lot of things both good and
bad came to earth
but in the end here we are on the most
unique and undoubtedly
beautiful planet in the whole known
universe